# WATER-QUALITY-TRENDS
Water quality trends in the Commonwealth of Virginia

WATER QUALITY TRENDS IN VIRGINIA 1997 – 2016

Introduction
The Water Quality Monitoring, Restoration, and Information Act (WQMIRA) of Virginia (§ 62.1-44.19:5.) directs the Department to “determine water quality trends within specific and easily identifiable geographically defined water segments…and provide summaries of the trends as well as available data and evaluations so that citizens of the Commonwealth can easily interpret and understand the conditions of the geographically defined water segments” , .   To satisfy this regulatory requirement, the objective of this chapter is to quantitatively describe changes in water quality (that is, trends) that have occurred from 1997-2016.  In most cases, the 12 chemical and physical water quality characteristics evaluated for this investigation provide a relatively complete description of overall water quality, Table 1 on page 2 (These characteristics are referred to as parameters).
Detecting trends requires datasets encompassing longer periods than are traditionally used in the 305(b) assessment process.  Furthermore, because of the seasonal variability of water quality parameters, trend datasets must also contain measurements among the various seasons of the year.
The Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (VADEQ) operates a network of 410 permanent trend stations where monthly or bimonthly data are collected for a variety of key water quality parameters.  These fixed stations are located in areas of special interest including those near the mouths of our major rivers, along the fall line, near flow gaging stations, at designated non-tidal stations monitored to evaluate how rivers affect the Chesapeake Bay.  These stations have rich histories of monitoring with some dating back to the late 1960’s pre-dating the Federal Clean Water Act of 1972, see Figure 1 Long Term Monitoring Stations on page 2 and Table 2 Long-Term Trend Monitoring Stations (410 total stations) summarized by Water Body Type and Basin. on page 3.
Water quality trends are central to the determination that the efforts of reducing and controlling pollution entering our waters are effective.  Water quality trend monitoring may also act as a sentinel to identify new potential risks.  The VADEQ Statewide Water Quality Monitoring Strategy provides a standardized method for site selection, frequency and methodology of sample collection.  This standardization across the trend network provides data that can be statistically analyzed for the detection of water quality trends. 
It should be noted that the goal of trend analysis is to detect changes in concentrations or values of key water quality parameters and not on whether the measured values are particularly high or low inherent in nonparametric statistics.  For example, an increasing trend in suspended solids indicates degrading water quality, but even after such an increase, solids may remain relatively low, and overall water quality relatively good.
The detection of trends in this report is accomplished by applying a formal statistical analysis to the data.  A modified seasonal Kendall analysis developed at the Department of Statistics at Virginia Tech, is used to test the null hypothesis that there is no trend (Zipper et al. 1998) .  When the test procedure rejects this hypothesis a measurable trend of increase or decrease has occurred over the period of record. The calculated probability, p, indicates the significance of getting the observed results by chance, when no actual trend exists.  Therefore, the likelihood that the data indicate an actual trend increases as p decreases.  Trends are considered significant when the confidence is 90% or greater (p<0.10), that is, when the chance of getting the observed sampling results when no actual change has occurred is less than 10%.

 

